```LAGRANGE
           __   __             __   ___
|     /\  / _` |__)  /\  |\ | / _` |__
|___ /~~\ \__> |  \ /~~\ | \| \__> |___

```
# Help

## What is Gemini

Gemini is a simple protocol for serving content over the internet. It specifies a Markdown inspired format allowing basic plain text document markup. Compared to HTTP and HTML, Gemini is vastly simpler and easier to work with.

=> gemini://geminiprotocol.net/docs/faq.gmi Project Gemini FAQ
=> gemini://geminiprotocol.net/docs/specification.gmi Protocol and 'text/gemini' specification

## What is Lagrange

Lagrange is a cross-platform client for browsing Geminispace. It offers modern conveniences familiar from web browsers, such as smooth scrolling, inline image viewing, multiple tabs, visual themes, Unicode fonts, bookmarks, history, and page outlines.

Like Gemini, Lagrange has been designed with minimalism in mind. It depends on a small number of essential libraries. It is written in C and uses SDL for hardware-accelerated graphics. OpenSSL is used for secure communications.

=> about:lagrange           About Lagrange
=> https://www.libsdl.org   SDL: Simple DirectMedia Layer
=> https://www.openssl.org  OpenSSL: Cryptography and SSL/TLS Toolkit

### Features

* Beautiful typography with full Unicode support
* Autogenerated page style and icon for each Gemini domain
* Light and dark color themes
* Scaling page content (50%...200%)
* Custom scaling factor for the UI
* Sheet (iOS) or sidebars (iPadOS) for managing bookmarks, identities and subscribed feeds, and viewing browsing history, open tabs, page outline, and site structure
* Multiple tabs
* Split view for browsing two pages at once (iPadOS)
* Customizable UI accent color
* Open links via keyboard shortcuts
* Open image and audio links inline on the same page
* Find text on the page
* Instant back/forward navigation using cached content
* Subscribe to Gemini and Atom feeds
* Identity management — create and use TLS client certificates
* Smart suggestions when typing an URL — search bookmarks, history, feeds, identities
* Search engine integration
* Configurable text snippets that can be pasted in input fields and used as custom search queries
* Use Gemini pages as a source of bookmarks
* Audio playback: MP3, Ogg Vorbis, WAV
* Read Gempub books and view ZIP archive contents
* Support for uploading and editing content using the Titan protocol
* Support for the classic protocols Gopher and Finger
* Support for hobbyist protocols: Spartan, Nex, Misfin, and Guppy
* Proxy servers for Gemini, HTTP, and Gopher content

# 1 User interface

## 1.1 Navigation

### 1.1.1 URL entry and quick search

As you enter text in the navbar URL input field, Lagrange starts looking for matches in bookmarks, subscribed feeds, history, identities, and content of cached pages. This provides an easy way to find one of these items or return to a page you've been on recently.

Search within cached pages is limited to the (small) set of pages that Lagrange keeps in memory for backwards navigation. Search terms are case insensitive, and if many words are entered, they are all required to appear in the specified order in any matched content.

Searching is limited to the currently open tabs. This is because navigation history is tab-specific: closing a tab will delete its history as well.

You can do search engine queries via the URL input field. When a search URL is configured on the "General" page of Settings, text entered in the URL field is passed to the search URL as a query parameter. A search query will only occur when Enter is pressed while the [Search ⏎] indicator is visible. One way to configure the search URL is to right-click on a search engine's "Search" link — say, when you are on the engine's front page — and select "Use as Search URL" from the context menu.

See section 2.5 about further customizing the search behavior with snippets.

### 1.1.2 Links

The type and destination of a link are indicated by the link's icon and color: ➤ links to the same domain, and 🌐 to a different domain. The default colors are:

* Blue for Gemini
* Green for Gopher
* Orange for HTTP(S)
* Red for other/unknown/invalid (cannot be opened)

Links colors may change depending on the page color theme. (See section 2.3.1 "Color themes".)

If a link would normally use the default ➤ icon but there is an Emoji at the beginning of the link label, that Emoji is used as the link icon instead. In these cases, you can always assume that the link is a Gemini link whose destination is the same domain that you're currently on.

The "Network" page of Settings has a few settings that affect the presentation of links and URLs in general:

* "Decode URLs" causes percent-coding to be decoded for the user interface, so one can see international characters in URLs.
* "Maximum URL size" sets a limit for how long URLs can be. While Gemini servers are required to enforce a limit of 1024 bytes for URLs, this setting affects all URLs regardless of scheme. Link lines with URLs longer than this will be presented as plain text.

### 1.1.3 Page caching

When navigating to a new page, the old page is cached in memory. If you navigate back, the cached copy of the old page is restored. Think of it as rewinding time — you return to a past time as if nothing had happened. The same applies to forward navigation; cached pages are loaded if available. This allows back and forward navigation to happen instantly, without any network requests.

The page cache is saved to a file when Lagrange is shut down so it can be restored on the next launch.

Maximum size of the cache can be configured on the "Content" page of Settings. Note that the entire cache is kept in memory at runtime. When the cache fills up, the oldest and largest page content is removed — both factors contribute to the removal. You can set the maximum size to 0 to disable caching altogether, but that will also disable the page content quick search feature.

### 1.1.4 Opening links in a new tab

Long-pressing a link shows a link-specific context menu. From there, you can open the link in a new foreground or background tab.

### 1.1.5 Opening links to the side (iPadOS)

"Open Link to the Side" in the link context menu opens the link in split view mode. When in split view mode, your tab pinning preference will determine the split side on which clicked links will open. See section 1.9 for more information about split view modes.

### 1.1.6 Opening links using the keyboard

When a keyboard is connected to your device, it can be used to navigate and open links.

Lagrange has two modes for navigating links with the keyboard. The first uses a modifier key (${ALT} by default): while the modifier is pressed, alphanumeric shortcuts are shown for each visible link in the window. You can then press the corresponding key, still holding the modifier, to open a link. The second mode is based on letters only and focuses on the page row keys. You press and release the activation key ("F" by default) to show the link shortcut letters. In this mode the shortcuts are not in alphabetic order, but instead roughly sorted based on proximity to the F and J keys. You may find this easier to use since it is a simple sequence of key presses without using modifiers, allowing one to keep fingers on or near the home row.

You can give it a try using the link below. Either hold down ${ALT}, or press and release F.

=> gemini://geminiprotocol.net/ Project Gemini

## 1.2 Tabs

Long-pressing on buttons in the tab bar shows a context menu for tab-related functions.

The set of open tabs and their full contents are saved when you quit the application and restored when relaunch it.

### 1.2.1 Highlighting of open links

When you open a tab, and the URL of that tab is found in a link on another page, that link will be highlighted. This way you can conveniently see which links are currently open in other tabs. These highlights will assist you in navigating hierarchies and index pages.

### 1.2.2 Auto-reloading

A tab can be set to auto-reload at given intervals. The setting is remembered until the tab is closed. This is helpful if you keep a  periodically updated page open for longer periods of time.

The feature can be found in the page context menu: "Tools > Set Auto-Reload...".

### 1.2.3 Managing tabs

You can open as many tabs as you want, but it becomes challenging to switch between them and locate them because the tab bar will only show a series of tiny buttons. Long-pressing on the tab bar opens a context menu that lets you close multiple tabs at once. You can also open the Tabs sidebar (see the next section) to list all the open tabs and access them conveniently.

## 1.3 Sidebars

On iOS, the sidebar appears as a sheet that pops up when tapping the fourth toolbar button from the left. (By default, it has the 🕮  Bookmarks icon.) The icon of this button reflects the sidebar tab that was last accessed. Long-pressing on the toolbar button shows a menu for choosing the tab to open.

On iPadOS, there are desktop-like left and right sidebars. Look for a bar indicator on the bottom left and right edge of the screen. Swiping inward over the indicator will open the corresponding sidebar. Sidebars can also be opened using a button in the toolbar.

Sidebars can have up to eight tabs:

* Bookmarks: List of bookmarks that you've created, organized into folders. Bookmarks appear first in search results for quick and easy access.
* Feeds: Combined list of all entries found on subscribed pages.
* Subscriptions: List of the subscribed pages, how many entries they have, and when was the latest entry posted.
* Identities: TLS client certificates.
* Outline: List of the headings in the currently open tab. Useful when reading longer documents.
* Structure: Directory tree compiled from known URIs related to the current site, for quick navigation.
* Tabs: List of all open tabs. You can close and reorder tabs using this list.
* History: Chronological list of visited URLs. This is not a full history of all the URLs you've accessed over time — only unique URLs are shown at the latest access time.

The visible tabs are configurable. You can go to "Settings > Sidebars" to enable or disable each one individually. The disabled ones can still be accessed via the [⋯] button in the sidebar header.

${CTRL+}1 through ${CTRL+}8 switch between the sidebar tabs, or hide the sidebar if the currently open tab's key is pressed. You can also press Escape to dismiss sidebars.

### 1.3.1 Vertical tabs

The Tabs sidebar shows all the open tabs as a list. Each item in the list indicates status information about the tab:

* The item is shown in bold text if you haven't viewed it yet, for example if it was opened in the background.
* There is a reload icon 🔃 next to the tab title if a page contents are currently being fetched.
* There is an audio playback indicator 🔊 if the tab is playing audio.

The items in the list are draggable so you can reorder the tabs as needed.

The list's context menu lets you close multiple tabs and move individual tabs to split view or into a new window, just like the context menu of the horizontal tab bar.

You can hide the default horizontal tab bar and manage tabs solely using the sidebar. The setting for this is "Settings > User interface > Hide tab bar". It helps to enable the "Tabs" tab in either the left or right sidebar to have easier access to it.

### 1.3.2 Structure navigator

The Structure sidebar is a tool for quickly navigating inside a capsule and viewing its structure as a tree. Gemini has no way of providing any structural metadata along with the pages you visit, so a meaningful hierarchy is only available if the site's URI paths provide one. Fortunately, many Gemini capsules are manually constructed and human authors tend to set up proper directory structures, so the resulting hierarchy is often useful. At the very least, it is convenient to discover and navigate sibling entries.

While you are browsing pages on a site, the tree is populated using link URIs you come across — do not expect to see a fully populated tree when arriving at a site for the first time. Navigation history, bookmarks, and feed entries are used for populating the initial tree, but any links discovered on loaded pages are not preloaded or persistently remembered.

Directories in the tree are foldable. You can identify a folded directory by the 〉symbol and the number that shows how many items are inside. Directories unfold automatically to highlight the current page. You can manually unfold a directory by clicking on it, and it stays unfolded henceforth. Clicking on an unfolded directory will open the corresponding directory URI. In other words, to navigate to a directory that is currently folded, you will need to click on the item twice. The tree's context menu can be used to re-fold unfolded directories, although they will only actually fold if they are unrelated to the currently open page.

The Structure sidebar is not Gemini-specific. It does work best with natural path hierarchies, though. For example, Gopher selectors may or may not refer to a directory hierarchy, and furthermore, Gopher URI paths start with an item type character. This effectively breaks the tree into multiple branches, making the organization more difficult to understand. Another challenging case is dynamically generated sites that use hashes or sequence numbers to identify resources.

## 1.4 Bookmarks

Newly added bookmarks appear at the bottom of the Bookmarks sidebar. You can drag and drop items in the list to change their order when the Bookmarks sidebar is in edit mode.

In addition to a title, bookmarks can have tags. Some tags have a special meaning, but you are free to enter whatever you want in the tags field. In quick search results, tags are given extra weight so they appear higher in results.

By default, bookmarks are assigned random icons. You can enter a custom icon for a bookmark in the bookmark edit dialog to make it easier to recognize a particular site at a glance. The icon must be a single Unicode character. It will appear in the bookmark list, tab titles, feed entry list, quick search results, and page top banners.

### 1.4.1 Folders

You can drag and drop bookmarks in and out of folders when the Bookmarks sidebar is in edit mode. Folders can also be nested inside each other. Clicking on a folder heading will toggle its fold state, either hiding or showing its contents. The fold state is remembered across sessions.

You can open all the bookmarks inside a folder in new tabs using the sidebar context menu (long-press on a folder). A new tab is instantly created for each bookmark, including ones in nested subfolders. However, the bookmarked pages will load sequentially to avoid excessive network traffic.

### 1.4.2 Sharing and batch importing

=> about:bookmarks  The special page "about:bookmarks" is used for listing bookmarks in various ways.
It has three different modes that can be opened via menus:

* listing bookmarks alphabetically
* listing bookmarks grouped by tag
* listing bookmarks as a feed with creation dates

The generated page can be saved to Downloads or you can copy all or parts of it to the clipboard. For example, you can then use these listings to share public bookmarks on your capsule.

To import all links on a page as bookmarks, use the page context menu to select "Tools > Import Links as Bookmarks...". You can also long-press on individual links and select "Bookmark Link...".

Importing links on a page will not cause any folders to be (re)created. To fully export and import your bookmarks, tags, custom icons, and folders, see section 1.12.

### 1.4.3 Remote bookmarks

This version of Lagrange does not support automatic bookmark synchronization. By default, all bookmarks are stored locally. However, a remote bookmarks feature is provided to allow accessing a set of bookmarks from everywhere. This way you can set up your own centralized bookmark pages or use any public Gemini page as a source of bookmarks.

A local bookmark can be turned into a source of remote bookmarks via the Bookmarks context menu. Long-press the bookmark and select "Use as Remote Source". The ⤓ icon is used to indicate remote items in the Bookmarks list. Remote sources are checked when launching Lagrange and manually with the "Refresh Remote Sources" menu item.

All links found in the remote sources become remote bookmarks and are included in the Bookmarks list. If a URL is already bookmarked locally, any remote bookmarks with a matching URL are not shown.

Note that remote bookmarks are read-only: they cannot be edited or tagged. This means you cannot subscribe to a remote bookmark without first making a local duplicate of it. If you want to make local copies of all the links in the remote source, open the remote source page and use the "Import Links as Bookmarks..." context menu item on it. After refreshing remote sources, the remote copies of the bookmarks will not be shown any more.

### 1.4.4 Behavioral tags

Bookmarks may use a number of special tags that control their behavior. In practice, these are stored in the bookmarks.ini "tags" entries, but are hidden from the Tags field in the app UI.

* A ".homepage" tag makes a bookmark one of the pages that will be opened when pressing the 🏠 button. If multiple bookmarks are tagged as homepages, a random one is selected.
* A ".subscribed" tag means that Lagrange will periodically fetch the bookmarked page and look for Gemini feed links. All the found links that match the required style ("YYYY-MM-DD Entry title") will appear in the Feeds sidebar tab.
* ".headings" can be used together with ".subscribed" to subscribe to new headings instead of Gemini feed links.
* ".ignoreweb" modifies a feed subscription to ignore all HTTP(S) URLs. This is useful if a feed contains both Gemini and web links, but you're only interested in the Gemini ones.
* The ".remotesource" tag marks the bookmark as a source of remote bookmarks. All links on the source pages are shown as remote bookmarks in the Bookmarks list.
* The ".remote" tag is used for remote bookmarks. These bookmarks cannot be edited or tagged, but you can make a local duplicate to turn it into a regular bookmark.
* The ".usericon" tag prevents a random icon to be selected for the bookmark. This tag is automatically applied when an icon character is entered in the bookmark editor.
* The ".linksplit" tag causes all links on the bookmarked page to open to the side, automatically enabling split view mode.

## 1.5 Subscribing to feeds

You may be familiar with XML-based RSS and Atom feeds from the web. The Gemini equivalent of these is Gemini feeds. A Gemini feed is simply a regular 'text/gemini' page that contains one or more links whose labels are formatted in a particular way. This makes it very easy to write pages that clients can subscribe to.
=> gemini://geminiprotocol.net/docs/companion/subscription.gmi  See "Subscribing to Gemini pages" for more information.

Lagrange supports Gemini and Atom feed subscriptions. Atom feeds are automatically translated to the Gemini feed format so they can be viewed and subscribed to like a normal 'text/gemini' page. RSS feeds are not supported.

Subscriptions are managed via bookmarks. When you subscribe to a feed page, a bookmark is created and the special ".subscribed" tag is applied on it. In the Bookmarks list, this is indicated by a ★ icon. There is no other difference between normal bookmarks and feed subscriptions — you may tag any bookmark as a subscription and Lagrange will look through it for feed-style links. The bookmark title is used as the feed title. This defaults to the top heading of the feed index page, but you can edit it to suit your needs.

Feeds are refreshed periodically while Lagrange is running, and also immediately after launching if it has been a while since the previous refresh. You may also manually refresh all feeds via the menus.

The Feeds sidebar tab displays recent feed entries. From there you can open entries and mark them as read/unread.

To see a list of all entries from all feeds, open the "Feed entries" page in "Settings > User Data". This page also shows how long has it been since the previous feed refresh.
=> about:feeds

## 1.6 Identities (client certificates)

Gemini uses TLS client certificates for user/session identification purposes. Unlike on the web where user identity tracking is covert and automatic, client certificates must be manually taken into use, and you are able to define how long each certificate remains valid. The term "Identity" is used in Lagrange to refer to client certificates.

The "Identities" settings page shows all identities known to Lagrange. This includes identities created in Lagrange and any identities based on imported X.509 certificates.

### 1.6.1 Creating a new identity

Tap on the 👤 button in the toolbar and select "New Identity...". Alternatively, you can go to "Settings > Identities" and tap the ➕ button.

Consider any information you enter in the certificate as public — only the Common Name is required to be non-empty. The generated certificate will use the Common Name as the issuer and subject of the certificate, making it clear that the certificate is self-signed. The other required field is the expiration date in "Valid until". Entering a year is sufficient, and means that the certificate is valid until the end of that year.

### 1.6.2 Using an identity

You will need to select an identity when you encounter this error message:

> 🔑 Certificate Required

Go to "Settings > Identities" and tap on an identity to toggle it on/off for the currently open URL. On subsequent page loads, the certificate will then be sent to the server when the URL or any URL under it is fetched. You can click on the 👤 button in the navigation bar to see which identity is being used for the current page.

Identities can also be accessed via lookup results. Identities matching the navbar search term are shown as the last category in the lookup results list. From there, one can toggle an identity for the current page, or stop using it on all pages.

### 1.6.3 Importing existing certificates

To import an existing X.509 certificate as an identity, click on 👤 and select "Import...".

When the Import Identity dialog opens, it checks the currently open page and the system clipboard for any certificates and private keys in PEM format. If found, these are automatically loaded in.

## 1.7 Downloads

Files can be saved to a chosen folder on your device after being fully downloaded.

The locally cached downloaded files can be viewed in Settings: "User Data > Show Downloads". These are usually automatically deleted after some time. To delete a file manually, long-press on it and select "Delete File" from the menu. (You will need to refresh the Downloads page manually after deleting.)

## 1.8 Uploads (with Titan)

Titan is a sister protocol to Gemini that enables sending arbitrary amounts of data from a client to a server. The Gemini protocol itself only enables sending up to 1024 bytes of data in a request. Furthermore, the request URL also counts against that limit, and the sent data must be percent-encoded so it can be parsed as a valid URL. Consequently, Gemini clients can only send very limited amounts of data to a server. Titan solves this by expanding the request so that the request URL is followed by a payload field. When it comes to TLS, Titan is equivalent to Gemini, so the same server and client certificates can be used with both.

=> gemini://transjovian.org/titan  Titan Protocol (by Alex Schroeder)

While Titan and Gemini are related, Titan is a separate protocol and regular Gemini servers are not expected to support it. Whether it makes sense to allow clients to upload large amounts of data is a service-specific question. For example, a server that hosts a gemlog could enable Titan uploads for submitting new posts, or editing existing posts by uploading a revised version.

As far as Lagrange is concerned, Titan is just one of the supported URL schemes. Whenever you try to open a "titan://" URL, no matter if it is manually entered into the URL field, or by clicking on a link, opening a bookmark, feed entry, or via a redirect, a dialog will open where you can specify the data to upload.

The Titan upload dialog supports two ways to enter the data:

* You can type text in the input field on the "Text" tab. It will be sent to the server using 'text/plain' as the media type.
* You can choose a file to upload. The details of the file to be uploaded are visible on the "File" tab. The media type can be specified manually if Lagrange does not correctly detect it.

The upload token is a feature of Titan where servers can require a certain token text/passphrase for uploads. It is up to the server how this is interpreted. It could be used as a simple password, or even a command to further instruct the server about what to do with the uploaded data. Please refer to the server's instructions about what to enter here. The token may also be left empty.

After you have entered/chosen the content, tap on the "Upload" button in the top right corner to begin uploading data. Note that on the phone, "Upload" button is visible on the main page of the dialog, so you will need to navigate back from the text entry page before you can upload.

The text entered into the upload dialog's text field is protected against accidental closing of the dialog. The previous text is restored when the dialog is reopened. The text field contents are only cleared when the submitted Titan request has been successfully completed.

## 1.9 Split view mode (iPad only)

By default, only one tab is visible at a time in the application window. However, sometimes it is beneficial to see two pages at once. For example, many capsules have top-level menus or lists of articles, and keeping the menu/index visible on the side makes navigation less cumbersome.

Split view mode divides the UI into two equivalent parts. You can have multiple tabs in each split. Closing all tabs on one side will remove the split and return back to the normal unsplit mode.

Each split has its own sidebars, which means that in split view mode you can have a total of four sidebars open at the same time.

### 1.9.1 Switching focus

At any given time, one of the splits has input focus. This is indicated by a colored line at the top of the section, and some UI elements will be dimmed out on the unfocused side.

If a keyboard is connected, you can use the Next/Previous Tab keys to switch keyboard focus between the sections. Next/Previous Tab is particularly convenient as it cycles through all open tabs, jumping to the other side of the split when appropriate. You may also press Tab to cycle input focus between all the URL input fields.

### 1.9.2 Pinning

View splitting is primarily intended to assist in navigating hierarchies and lists. In the typical use case, you'll have a menu or an index page on the left, and a content page open on the right. Links clicked on the left will automatically open on the right.

This is called "pinning" and the behavior can be configured in Settings. The "Split view pinning" setting on the "General" page of Settings controls where links get opened in a split view. There are three modes available:

* "None" causes links to open in the tab where the link is clicked. In this mode, both sides of the split can be navigated independently.
* "Left Tab" causes links clicked on the left tab to open on the right side. The page open in the left tab is therefore "pinned" and does not change unless you enter a new URL or navigate to the parent or root.
* "Right Tab" is the same but works the other way around. The page open in the right tab is pinned and clicked links open on the left.

The default pinning mode is "Left Tab".

The ◧ indicator is shown in the URL input field when the current tab is pinned.

## 1.10 Gempub

Gempub is an e-book/archival format that is essentially a set of Gemtext files stored in a ZIP archive.

=> https://codeberg.org/oppenlab/gempub  Gempub specification

Lagrange can be used as a Gempub reader. When a .gpub file has been saved locally, you can open it in the application to see the book cover page. On the cover page you will find a link that opens the contents of the book. When clicked, split view mode is automatically enabled and both the book index page and the first chapter are shown (unless split view pinning has been disabled).

## 1.11 Input prompt

An input prompt dialog is shown when the server asks for input from the user. Typically, you would enter just a word or two, e.g., the search terms for a search engine. However, input prompts have a few advanced features that can help with more sophisticated use cases.

The dialog has a context menu for additional functionality. Click on the Ellipsis (⋯) button to open it.

* "Paste Preceding Line" inserts the contents of the Gemtext source line that immediately precedes the link that caused the input prompt to open. This is sometimes used for "Edit" actions in Gemini applications.
* "Assume This URL Requires Input" modifies what happens when the prompt's URL is opened. Normally, it takes two requests to submit input: the first one causes the prompt to open, and the second one sends the user's input to the server. To make this more efficient, you can assume the URL requires input and Lagrange will prompt you automatically before sending anything to the server. (It is possible that some applications may expect the two requests to arrive in a sequence, however usually there are no problems submitting query strings directly.)
* Restoring past entries: The rest of the items in the menu are for input that has been submitted previously. Selecting one will cause it be inserted into the input field.

## 1.12 Export/import user data

The export/import feature allows one to manually export and import identities, bookmarks, text snippets, browsing history, and site-specific information via a ZIP archive. The feature is available in Settings under the "User Data" page.

In practice, exporting creates a compressed archive that you can then save to a folder on your device. From there, you can transfer the archive manually onto another device, or just put in a safe place for backup.

Opening the exported archive works similar to fontpacks (see section 2.4): when viewing the ZIP in the app, there is a button in the bottom of the window to import the contained data. Fine-grained controls are provided to choose which data gets imported and how, so you do not have to overwrite all the existing data.

Note that browsing history also contains the read status of feed entries, because those are tracked based on whether entry URLs have been visited. This means a transfer of user data includes the up-to-date status of each subscription as well.

There is no automatic sync service available to share user data between multiple devices.

# 2 Customization

## 2.1 Browsing behavior

The "Open index.gmi in ZIP archives" option controls whether index.gmi pages are automatically opened while browsing the contents of a ZIP archive. The purpose is to simulate the behavior of a Gemini server where opening a directory will by default show its index page. Enabling this option makes navigating an archived copy of a capsule a more streamlined experience.

"Split view pinning" controls which tab links will be opened on when browsing in split view mode. The default mode is "Left Tab", which means that the page in the left tab is pinned (remains unchanged) when clicking on a link. For more information, see section 1.9.

## 2.2 UI appearance

There are four different color schemes for the UI: two for dark mode, and two for light mode. These can be selected on the "Appearance" tab of the Preferences dialog:

* Dark mode: "Black" and "Dark" have a fully black or dark gray UI.
* Light mode: "White" and "Light" have completety white or light gray UI.

Lagrange will automatically switch between dark and light modes if the "Use system theme" setting is enabled.

## 2.3 Page style and layout

The "Colors", "Fonts", and "Page Style" pages of Settings let you customize the appearance and arrangement of page contents.

### 2.3.1 Color themes

Page content color themes are selected on the "Colors" page of Settings, under "Page Colors". The "Dark theme" is active in dark UI mode, and the "Light theme" is active in light UI mode.

* Colorful Dark: All elements of the page are colored; the background is dark and text is light. This mode provides the best visual distinction between different domains because more color combinations are available.
* Colorful Light: A single, bright background color with black text. This is the most colorful light theme. Note that colored backgrounds may reduce readability.
* Black: Gray body text and brightly colored headings on a black background.
* Gray: Slightly brighter version of Black, i.e., gray body text and colored headings on a gray background.
* White: Colored headings on a white background.
* Sepia: Light sepia background with black text. Does not change depending on domain; use this for readability if you prefer a sepia reading experience.
* Oceanic: Mostly teal/blue theme with a few orange/red accents. Brightness and saturation vary randomly based on domain.
* High Contrast: White background with black text. Does not change depending on domain; use this for readability if you prefer maximum contrast between text and the background.

The "Saturation" setting can be used to tone down the theme colors for a more neutral appearance.

### 2.3.2 Site-specific colors

You can manually customize the color theme of a site. Open "Page Information" by tapping on the navbar lock icon and tap on "Settings" to open the Site-Specific Settings dialog.

The "Theme palette seed" is the input data given to the theme generator that determines a site's color palette. The theme generator is designed to algorithmically choose a palette whose colors go together. It is not possible to individually pick the colors of a theme.

You can enter any text as the palette seed. By default, the seed is the site's hostname, or a user name found in the URL path (e.g., "gemini://example.com/~User/" → seed "User"). Examples of how to use this:

* Enter a word or phrase, or just random characters, to find a theme that you like.
* To copy the theme of another site, enter the hostname of that site as the seed.

### 2.3.3 Text styling

The fonts for document headings, body text, and preformatted blocks can be chosen separately. There is also a separate font for monospaced body text that is used when the Gemini/Gopher-specific "Monospace body" option is enabled. See section 2.4 for more details about using fonts.

The "Bold links" option determines whether links use a bold font. Enabling "Visited" means that the bold font is used also for visited links, not just unvisited ones. "On Dark" and "On Light" enable bold links on a dark/light background. For readability, using bold fonts on a light background is recommended because differences in text color and link icon color are less noticeable.

### 2.3.4 Layout options

Paragraph layout options:

* Line width: This setting determines the maximum width for text lines. "Fill" disables the maximum limit and fits text lines to the full width of the window. (Shorter lines are generally easier to read.)
* Line spacing: Adjust spacing between text lines. A value of 1.1 would add 10% more space, while 2.0 would mean there is a full-height empty line between all text lines. For the best results, keep this pretty close to 1.0. (Values smaller than 1.0 may lead to visual artifacts as lines become overlapped.)
* Tab width: Number of spaces to use for tab stops.
* Justify: Paragraphs are justified when they at least three lines long. Spaces on each line are expanded to equalize line widths.
* Big 1st paragraph: When enabled, the leading paragraph on the page is shown in a slightly larger font. (The leading paragraph is autodetected by Lagrange, so it is not guaranteed to always be appropriately chosen.)

Other layout options:

* Quote indicator: Quoted text is shown in an italic font. Additionally, you can select between a quotation mark icon and the traditional vertical line along the left edge of the quote.
* Capsule icon on left side: When the window is wide enough, show the capsule icon on the left side of the page at a fixed position together with the current level 1 heading.
* Collapse preformatted: After loading a page, immediately hide all preformatted blocks, showing only the alt texts.

## 2.4 Fonts

This version of Lagrange supports TrueType fonts. To use a new font, simply view a .ttf (or .fontpack) file in the app and a page footer action is available for performing the installation.

The "Fonts" page of Settings contains options that affect the appearance of text in page content, the user interface, and text rendering in general.

To be precise, on this tab you can select which typefaces to use for certain elements of the page and the UI; picking a particular font (including its size, weight, style, etc.) for specific elements is not possible. Lagrange controls the size and styling of text by choosing fonts according to your theme and typeface preferences. (The term "font" is often used to mean "typeface" in this document and in the app UI.)

The fonts for document headings, body text, preformatted blocks, and the user interface can be chosen separately. There is also a separate font for monospaced body text, used when the protocol-specific "Monospace body" option is enabled.

There are two built-in fonts available:

* "Source Sans" is the default UI font that is also used for page content.
* "Iosevka" is the monospaced font.

There is also an "Iosevka (compact)" variant that actually uses the font's original line spacing. It is the default for preformatted blocks to avoid gaps between lines of ASCII art, but not for body text for better legibility.

See sections 2.4.4 and 5 for more details about font management, compatibility, and configuration.

### 2.4.1 Monospace body

The "Monospace body" option causes all pages to be displayed in a monospace font. For example, most Gopher content has been written with the assumption of a monospace font, so it may provide a better reading experience to enable this for Gopher pages. The selected "Monospace font" is applied to the entire document.

Handling of whitespace in page content also changes when this option is enabled: spaces are no longer normalized so if the source uses multiple spaces somewhere, those are shown as-is.

### 2.4.2 ANSI escapes

=> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code  ANSI escape code (Wikipedia):
> ANSI escape sequences are a standard for in-band signaling to control cursor location, color, font styling, and other options on video text terminals and terminal emulators.

Sometimes these codes are used for things like colored ASCII art. However, Lagrange is not a terminal emulator so only a very minimal set of codes have any effect; the rest are ignored.

The "ANSI escapes" setting controls which ANSI escape codes are enabled:

* "FG Color" enables changes to text foreground color.
* "BG Color" enables changes to text background color.
* "Font Style" enables changing the font style: bold, italic, or monospace. (These correspond to codes 1, 3, and 11.)

A warning banner is displayed if any codes are detected on a page. This helps you be aware of potential visual artifacts, like text color that is being forced to black regardless of the page background color. Click on the warning to dismiss it on a per-site basis.

If you serve content via Gemini, please be aware that ANSI escapes may not be supported by clients, and may in fact disrupt the behavior of a client in unexpected ways. For instance, consider a screen reader or a web proxy that doesn't filter out the codes. Only employ ANSI escapes when the user has somehow indicated that is their preference.

### 2.4.3 Other font options

The "Glyph warnings" option controls whether a warning will be shown when a page is missing one or more characters. This is typically due to the page being in a language that is not covered by any of the installed fonts. Clicking on the glyph warning banner opens the font management page.

### 2.4.4 Managing fonts

Open "about:fonts" to see all the installed fonts, and enable, disable or uninstall individual fontpacks. At the top of the page, there is a link to the skyjake.fi Font Library: a curated collection of fontpacks that can be freely distributed. From there you can conveniently install more fonts specifically tuned for Lagrange.

The rest of the page is divided to two sections: enabled and disabled fontpacks. Individual packs can be disabled, so they remain installed but not in use. (Tip: Use the Outline sidebar to see a list of all packs, if there are many.)

Click on the "View file" links to see what each fontpack contains. The fontpack format is described in section 5: it is simply a ZIP archive with some metadata and a bunch of font files. When you install a TrueType font (i.e., copy it to the user's fonts directory), it is treated as a fontpack containing a single file, although no ZIP archive is created for it. Use the "View fontpack.ini template" link to see the generated metadata that can be used as a basis for creating an actual fontpack.

About compatibility: fonts are complex, and while the TrueType format is not the most advanced one, it still has features that are not supported in Lagrange. The technical reason is that glyphs are rasterized using stb_truetype, a rather simple TrueType font library. (It's nice and small, though.) You may find that some fonts simply fail to load correctly, or look wrong in the app.

* Hinting is not supported.
* Bitmap glyphs are not supported.
* Multi-color glyphs are not supported.

TrueType Collections (.ttc) can be used, with the restriction that each declared font uses a single index from the collection. The index must be appended to the file name:
```.ttc example
regular = "NotoSansCJK-Regular.ttc:2"
```

## 2.5 Text snippets and custom queries

Gemlogs are often written entirely manually, so you may find yourself typing or copy-pasting the same headers, footers, or other small snippets into each post. You may also need to repeatedly enter specific pieces of text in a game or another interactive capsule. On desktop operating systems, there are multiple existing utilities that facilitate these use cases. While you may be able to use these with Lagrange, the app also has a built-in text snippet manager that works on any platform.

In the "Snippets" Settings page, you can define a set of text snippets that can be pasted into any input field via the field's context menu. Snippets can also be created by right-clicking on a link or selected text on a page.

Text snippets whose name begins with an exclamation point ("bang") have a special meaning: they are used for additional search query URLs. For example, if the snippet "!w" is defined as "gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/search", you can then enter the following in the navbar URL field to make a search on Gemipedia:
```
!w Gemini Protocol
```
The additional words following the "!w" bang snippet are appended as a query string to the URL expanded from the snippet. This way, you can configure any number of searches or other shortcuts that take input. Bang snippet names can be longer than a single character but they cannot contain spaces.

## 2.6 Proxies

Gemini allows relaying requests via a proxy server. On the "Network" page of Settings, you can configure proxy servers for Gemini, Gopher, and HTTP/HTTPS requests.

When an HTTP proxy server is configured, HTTP/HTTPS links will no longer open in the system's default web browser but will be loaded via the proxy, expecting it to serve a 'text/gemini' version of the link contents.

## 2.7 URL handling

The "Network" page of Settings has a few options related to handling URLs.

Enabling the "Decode URLs" option causes all percent-encoded URLs to be shown in decoded form in the UI. Enabling this option is useful when encountering URLs that contain characters outside the basic Latin (A-Z) alphabet. This does not affect what gets sent to a server when loading pages: Gemini requests are always required to be sent in encoded form.

The "Maximum URL size" setting defines what is considered a valid link in Gemtext. Link lines with URLs longer than this are not considered to be links and are displayed like regular text lines. This only affects links that don't use the "gemini" scheme. The maximum size of a Gemini URL is 1024 bytes.

Having a length limit is necessary due the special case of Data URLs:
=> https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2397  RFC 2397: The "data" URL scheme
With Data URLs, one is able to embed arbitrary data into a Gemtext file using link lines. This makes it possible to circumvent the intentional limitations of Gemini and override the clients' ability to choose which linked resources should be loaded and when. Without a limit, a server could for example send an arbitrarily large image attachment as part of the page, with no regard to the user's or client's preferences or abilities to view images. Also note that like any non-Gemini scheme, "data" is not expected to be supported by Gemini clients.

## 2.8 Keybindings

This version of Lagrange does not have user-configurable keybindings.

## 2.9 Gopher

Lagrange converts Gopher menus to Gemtext for presentation. There are a couple of settings that control the conversion.

On the "Page Style" page, the "Autodetect Gopher menu styling" option controls whether Gopher menus should use autodetected Gemtext styling. By default, the app's Gopher experience mimics that of Gemini, where preformatted ASCII art is in separate blocks and paragraph text has its own (variable-width) font. However, the autodetection does not always get it right. Menus with meticulously crafted ASCII may sometimes be misinterpreted. Disabling the style autodetection makes all text lines equal in appearance.

Enabling monospace body text for Gopher (on the "Fonts" page) will faithfully present the Gopher source text, with original whitespaces intact, while also using the chosen monospace font for all text.

# 3 iOS integration

## 3.1 Opening Gemini links

Lagrange registers itself as a "gemini" and "gopher" URL scheme handler, so you can click on Gemini/Gopher links in any application to open Lagrange with that URL.

## 3.2 Runtime files

The runtime files, e.g., bookmarks, preferences, identities, and history, are not directly accessible to the user. You can export user data to get a copy of the data, though.

# 4 MIME hooks

MIME hooks are not supported in the mobile version of Lagrange.

# 5 Fontpacks

Fontpack is a file format defined by Lagrange that is used to combine a set of font files with configuration metadata. The (unregistered) media type for .fontpack files is 'application/lagrange-fontpack+zip'.

A fontpack is a ZIP archive that must have a "fontpack.ini" file at the root level.

```fontpack.ini from firasans.fontpack
version = 1

[firasans]
name        = "Fira Sans"
glyphscale  = 0.85
regular     = "FiraSans-Regular.ttf"
italic      = "FiraSans-Italic.ttf"
light       = "FiraSans-Light.ttf"
semibold    = "FiraSans-SemiBold.ttf"
bold        = "FiraSans-Bold.ttf"
```

Fontpacks may use the Deflate compression method, but that can slow down launching the app because each font must then be decompressed before loading. Therefore, it is recommended to use the -0 (--compression-method store) option when creating the archive. You may also find the -j (--junk-paths) option helpful if the current working directory is not the one where fontpack.ini is located.

Each fontpack has an ID that comes from the file name: the ID of "firasans.fontpack" would be "firasans". Space characters are not allowed in the ID.

Fontpacks are versioned, i.e., they have a version number in their metadata. This makes it possible to tell when a fontpack is an updated version of an existing one. The fontpack ID (file name) must remain the same, though, regardless of the version number.

The "fontpack.ini" file uses TOML syntax and can specify any number of typefaces. In the example above, the line `[firasans]` begins the definition of a typeface called "firasans". If the same typeface is found in multiple fontpacks, only the first one that gets loaded is used; the rest are ignored. Typeface IDs can be the same or different than fontpack IDs; they exist in different namespaces. The typeface ID is what is actually used in "prefs.cfg" to save your font preferences.

## 5.1 Fontpack properties

`version` defines the version number of the fontpack. It is a single integer, and if omitted, defaults to zero. It has no specific meaning except that larger values are considered newer versions.

## 5.2 Typeface properties

### 5.2.1 General

* `name` (string) is the human-readable name of the typeface. This is used in the Preferences dialog and elsewhere in the UI.

### 5.2.2 Prioritization and exclusion

The same character's glyph(s) may be found in several fonts, so a prioritization is applied to pick the most appropriate font. Font selection may also depend on the context, for example preformatted blocks must be displayed using monospace fonts. These properties control when and if the typeface will be used.

* `priority` (integer) defines a sort order for typefaces. The ones with the highest priority are checked first.
* `override` (bool): whether this typeface is always checked first before any other one, in any context. Only one typeface can use this flag.
* `monospace` (bool): is this a monospace typeface and therefore suitable for preformatted blocks and monospace body text.
* `auxiliary` (bool): if true, this typeface is not included in Preferences as a font choice, but is still checked for glyphs if other fonts do not provide them. Suitable for miscellaneous symbols or additional languages, for examples.
* `allowspace` (bool): if true, an auxiliary font's metrics for space characters are used. Sometimes symbol fonts have extra wide spaces, so for example a space next to an Emoji would be too wide. This has no effect for non-auxiliary typefaces.

### 5.2.3 Metrics

These properties can be used to modify the height and spacing of the font.

* `height` (float) is a multiplier to alter the height of the font. It can be at most 2.0, to double the height. This simply scales the font smaller or larger without altering spacing.
* `glyphscale` (float) scales glyphs smaller without changing the height of the font. The value must be 1.0 or smaller. In effect, this lets you increase the spacing between consecutive lines of text. It can be combined with `height` to keep glyphs the same size but just increase line spacing. For example, `glyphscale` 0.833 would counter the scaling caused by `height` 1.2, increasing line spacing by 1.2x.
* `voffset` (float) is multiplier applied to the vertical offset that normally centers scaled glyphs on the line. This allows fine-tuning where the baseline of scaled glyphs ends up. Setting this to 1.0 means that glyphs are vertically centered after scaling with `glyphscale`; 0.0 would disable the centering. Reasonable values are likely in the 0.5…1.5 range, depending on the amount of scaling.

Changing only the `glyphscale` property is the recommended way to alter line spacing. This makes it easier to mix and match fonts on a single line without having to deal with changes in text height. Compare your adjusted scaling to see if it looks suitable next to normal body text.

Each of these properties can be set separately for UI text and page content by using the prefixes `ui.` and `doc.`. For example, to only scale the font when used in the UI, set `ui.height` instead of `height`.

### 5.2.4 Font files

A single typeface can use up to five font files.

* `regular` (string): path of a font file for the regular style. A relative path means that the file is loaded from inside the fontpack archive. Absolute paths can be used to refer to files on the local system.
* `italic` (string): path of a font file for the italic style.
* `light` (string): path of a font file for the light weight.
* `semibold` (string): path of a font file for the semibold weight.
* `bold` (string): path of a font file for the bold weight.

Only the regular style is required. Undefined styles fall back to the closest available style. The same file path can be used in multiple styles; only one copy of the file will be loaded to memory.

When the path refers to a TrueType Collection (.ttc), the font index to use must be appended to the file name:
```.ttc example
regular = "NotoSansCJK-Regular.ttc:2"
```

# 6 User data archives

Lagrange user data archives are compressed ZIP archives that contain browsing history, identities, bookmarks, text snippets, site-specific settings, and/or trusted server certificate fingerprints.

An export archive largely mirrors the contents of the runtime directory (section 3.5). However, the "lagrange-export.ini" metadata file must also be present:

```lagrange-export.ini
# Lagrange user data exported on 2022-04-01 13:34
version = "1.12.0"
timestamp = 1648809264
```
* `version` (string): Version of the app that generated the archive.
* `timestamp` (integer): Time of generation as a UNIX timestamp.

# 7 Misfin

Misfin is a messaging protocol that has been in the works since May 2023. Like Gemini, it relies on TLS and simple text-based requests, with 'text/gemini' as the content format.

Lagrange has supported Misfin since version 1.18. You can import Misfin identity certificates and send messages using them. You will still need a Misfin mailbox where you can receive messages — servers are expected to verify the identity of unknown senders by checking if the sender's certificate matches the one provided by their server.

A Misfin identity certificate is a TLS client certificate where:

* UID field specifies the mailbox name
* subject alternative name(s) specify the domain name(s)
* Common Name is the human-readable name

You will need to import one or more of these before sending any messages.

When sending a message, the Upload dialog opens in Misfin mode with "To" and "From" fields. As usual, the text editor in the dialog has basic Gemtext syntax highlighting, but otherwise the editor has nothing Misfin-specific. A toggle is provided if you want to send a copy of the message to yourself. Lagrange does not keep copies of sent messages because it does not maintain a local Misfin mailbox.

When you click on a link with a "misfin://" URI, the dialog opens automatically with the recipient address prefilled.

=> gemini://satch.xyz/misfin/  Misfin specification(s) and resources
=> gemini://misfin.org/  Original Misfin specification
=> gemini://bbs.geminispace.org/s/misfin  s/Misfin on BBS

# Open source licenses

=> about:license
