```LAGRANGE
           __   __             __   ___
|     /\  / _` |__)  /\  |\ | / _` |__
|___ /~~\ \__> |  \ /~~\ | \| \__> |___

```
# Release notes

## 1.20.8
* Adjusted first-line indentation so it not applied to text that looks like lists (starts with punctuation, numbers, etc.).
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.20.7
* Fixed: Text layout overflow when monospace body appearance is enabled with Gemini. (It was getting confused with normal plain text.)
* Fixed: Link icons not matching the body font size.
* Fixed: Link numbers/letters not matching the body font size.
* Fixed: Content width expansion in Gopher menus. (Line width measured incorrectly.)
* Adjusted first-line indentation to only occur when both previous and current paragraphs are getting wrapped.

## 1.20.6
* Improve legibility of text after a wrapped paragraph by adding a small first-line indent if the next text line follows immediately.
* Use a smaller font for plain text documents to fit more content in the window, matching the font used in preformatted blocks.
* Fixed: Prevent overlapping identity activations by removing any existing ones before activating a new identity on a given URL. (To conveniently switch between previously used identities, use the menu that appears when clicking the navbar Identity button. That preserves the current activation scope.)
* Gopher: Detect an unexpected binary response to a type `0` selector.
* Gopher: Detect when the response is a gophermap even if we requested type `0`.
* Gopher: Plain text now respects the "expand to long lines" option, avoiding wrapping when there is room in the window.
* Gopher: Fixed handling the `.\r\n` terminator in text responses.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.20.5
* Fixed: Bookmark context menu closes prematurely when any page is loaded.
* Fixed: Mismatched Bookmarks sidebar filter field background color.
* Fixed: Reject server responses where the header is too long.
* Improved build compatibility with old versions of SDL.
* Adjusted minimum page margins on desktop for increased breathing room.

## 1.20.4
* Fixed potential hang when stopping a network connection when a SOCKS proxy is active.
* Possible fix for Heading subscription entries returning to an unread state after a long time.
* Quit the app cleanly when receiving a SIGTERM signal.
* Improved CJK IME presentation. (Courtesy of Sidney Cammeresi.)
* Added a "Copy Link as Gemtext" context menu action and fixed missing items. (Courtesy of Sidney Cammeresi.)
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.20.3
* Fixed crash when hovering on an empty bookmark folder in the Bookmarks menu.
* Improved CJK IME support in text fields. (Courtesy of Sidney Cammeresi.)
* Upload dialog's text editor uses the modifier-key-only Return key behavior when that is the active one. This should help with composing CJK text.
* Added option to easily toggle SOCKS5 without losing the configuration.
* Fixed localhost addresses not being ignored by the SOCKS5 proxy.
* Gopher: Improving handling of a TAB character in Gopher URIs (query string).
* Updated stb library (bugfixes for image, image_resize2, truetype, vorbis).

## 1.20.2
* Fixed a crash during event handling when no gamepad is connected.
* Fixed a crash when there are cached feed entries belonging to a subscription whose bookmark has been deleted.
* Fixed build issue with glibc 2.43+.

## 1.20.1
* Windows: Fixed network connections with SOCKS5 enabled.
* Preferences: Hide the SOCKS5 password in the input field (use "sensitive" mode).
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.20

New features:
* SOCKS5 proxy support. When enabled, all connections and DNS resolution are tunneled through the proxy.
* Option to show input prompts at bottom of window (Preferences > Appearance). The placement can also be toggled in the input prompt […] menu.
* Scroll the page and lists by dragging with the middle mouse button.
* Context menu for error/warning messages. These messages are not selectable text so this way one can copy the message to the clipboard.
* Context menu for input dialog prompt text.
* Option for Return key behavior: Shift for newline, Command/Control for accept.
* Option to prefer IPv6 in DNS resolution.
* Experimental gamepad support. You can scroll the page and move a pointer with the thumb sticks, and map actions to gamepad buttons. (Gamepad does not interact with native popups, so gamepad controls work best without any native UI controls.)
* Build option for handheld devices (ENABLE_MOBILE_HANDHELD). This is a variant of the mobile phone layout with the assumption that a gamepad is used for controlling the app. It is suitable for handheld game consoles, for instance.

Changes and enhancements:
* Windows: Detect system dark mode and switch app color theme accordingly.
* Fixed ability to scroll the page while an input prompt is open.
* Plain text lines are wrapped to the maximum available width when the expand-to-long-lines option is enabled.
* Improved warning message when there is a problem with the proxy server certificate.
* Revised order of input prompt […] menu items; added prompt position toggle.

Fixes:
* Stability and behavior issues with audio players. For example, history navigation was not releasing audio player resources when leaving a page. (Previously, they were just paused.)
* Auto-stopping an audio player when at end of content.
* Excessive audio player refresh interval.
* Opening a link context menu using the keyboard shortcut will remember which link as hovered using the keyboard.
* Gopher: Misdetected menu styling particularly with non-ASCII characters.
* Crash in the simple text renderer (e.g., TUI) when encountering a Backspace character.
* Potential hang when laying out text into a narrow space.
* Invalid initial layout for resizable input fields, causing a flicker.
* OpenSSL error messages are no longer printed to stderr.

## 1.19.4
* Fixed: Context menu for Nex links.
* Titan: Don't send requests with an empty path.
* Windows: Fixed crash when opening WebP images.
* Windows: Fixed file path regressions that caused issues like fontpacks and identities not being loaded at launch. Paths that contain non-Latin characters were not correctly converted to/from UTF-8. The regressions occurred when switching to the MinGW build toolchain in 1.19.0.

## 1.19.3
* Updated bundled Noto Emoji font (Unicode 17).
* Changed priority for focusing search fields: focus the page contents search field unless the sidebar has focus.
* Fixed garbled stereo Opus playback.
* Fixed media type associated with .opus file extension.
* Fixed opening Opus audio as an inline player.
* TUI: Fixed moving focus to the sidebar when opening it.
* Misfin: Parse URIs with the format "misfin://user@host" as well, because these may be more compatible with external applications.
* Windows: Improved focus indication in split view mode.
* Windows: Fixed frame color when custom frame is disabled.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.19.2
* Indicate automatic reloading in the Tabs list.
* Fixed broken timestamp calculation when creating identities.
* Fixed parsing Gemini response header when there are excessive whitespace characters present.
* Fixed event handling glitch when opening a popup in split view mode.

## 1.19.1
* Improved alignment of the URL field to page contents.
* Fixed build errors and runtime crashes when compiling for mobile Linux.
* Fixed tab bar context menu placement.
* Fixed popups being dismissed prematurely (by an input notification).
* Fixed missing mouse hover indication on keyboard-focused buttons.
* Fixed text colors in the New Identity dialog's error popups.
* Fixed failure to create identity due to timestamp calculation error.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.19

New features:
* Sidebar tab for exploring the directory structure of a capsule. All known URLs (from page links, history, feed entries) are compiled into one navigable hierarchy. This provides an alternative view of capsule contents, for quick access and an overview.
* Sidebar tab for listing all open tabs ("vertical tabs"). The list indicates which tabs have not been seen yet. Drag-and-drop can be used to reorder tabs. There are status icons for page loading and audio playback.
* Filter text field in the Bookmarks sidebar: filters bookmarks based on titles, URLs, and tags. Built-in tags like ".subscribed" can be used to find bookmarks with special behavior (see Help section 1.4.4).
* Sidebar tab for managing feed subscriptions. Unlike the Feeds tab that shows feed entries, the Subscriptions tab shows higher-level information about each subscription, like the latest post date.
* Subscriptions sidebar context menu action "Reset Known Entries" for clearing the local cache of known entries. On next refresh, only the entries present in the source(s) are stored. (This is equivalent to manually deleting the "feeds.txt" file.)
* Setting for permanently hiding the horizontal tab bar. You can manage open tabs using the sidebar.
* Setting for showing quote text without italics.
* Link context menu action for copying the label text.
* Keyboard shortcuts for sidebar modes and moving current tab to a new window.
* JPEG XL image decoding is supported via libjxl (optional). (Courtesy of Christoph Liebender.)

Changes and enhancements:
* Individual sidebar tabs can be shown and hidden. You can configure the tabs separately for the left and right bars.
* The left and right sidebars have different tabs by default (previously the same tabs were on both sides).
* A dropdown menu in the sidebar header allows switching to any mode.
* Reorganized settings: the Fonts tab has returned, and there is now a Theme tab for page theme settings.
* X11: Restore window positions in their previous workspaces. (Courtesy of @norayr.)
* macOS: More icons for context menu items.

Fixes:
* Moving a tab to a new window or opening a link in a new window sometimes confused which window was the target.
* Clearing history did not update sidebars.
* Updating navbar back/forward buttons when switching tabs.
* Update link numbers/keys after a scroll stops, if numbering was activated during the scroll.
* When parsing a username from a URL, require the name appears at the start of the path.
* Crash when opening a malformed Titan URI.
* Potential crash when minimizing a window.
* Gopher: Encode `%` in the selector when forming a link URI.
* TUI: Handling non-printable characters in the text renderer.

## 1.18.8
* Reject Gemini responses that don't use an SP character (ASCII 32) as a separator, as required by the specification.
* Fixed scrollbar color contrast in light mode.
* Fixed line-shaped quote indicator on empty/short quote lines.

## 1.18.7
* Revised handling of reserved URI characters according to RFC 3986. The previous behavior did not fully conform to the standard.
* Fixed opening some WebP images. There was a problem checking for the "image/webp" media type.
* Fixed removal of unexpected NUL characters from the source text.
* Fixed redundant mouse events when receiving touch events on the desktop.

## 1.18.6
* Added Samogitian (sgs) UI translation.
* Link icons are now included in the clickable part of a line.
* Fixed handling of percent-encoded semicolons in the URI path component.
* Fixed crash when opening context menu in some input fields.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.18.5
* Fixed a potential crash when browsing to a bookmarked page due to inadvertent ID number overflow. (Courtesy of @cthulhu.)
* Erase possible link icon leftovers after toggling link numbering.
* Fixed hang when encountering the U+FDFD character.
* Fixed layout issue with empty list widgets (focus border only partially visible).
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.18.4
* Added option to disable page width expansion to fit long lines.
* Limited page width expansion to 33% so room is left for the current title in the margin.
* Audio player UI shows number of downloaded bytes if length of audio is still unknown.
* Strip CR characters in content pasted to input fields. Line breaks are expected to be just LFs.
* Fixed use of non-Gemini search URLs. (Do not force-prepend "gemini://".)
* Fixed handling of the reserved `:` character in URL paths.
* TUI: Fixed possible crash at launch.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.18.3
* TUI: Fixed background colors in reduced color modes (less than 256 colors).

## 1.18.2
* Misfin: URI format has changed to "misfin:address?message" instead of the previously used "misfin://address". The optional query string ("message") is used as the initial message contents if the upload dialog's text editor is empty.
* Increased number of concurrent feed subscription requests (now 10, was 4).
* Potential workaround for a crash during feed refresh.
* Fixed redirection counting (and related warnings) when requesting Titan URIs.
* Fixed perpetual load spinner animation when redirected to a Titan URL.
* TUI: Fixed Identities sidebar not responding to the context menu action.
* TUI: Fixed screen not being refreshed when a key is held down.
* TUI: Fixed black cursor on empty regions of the screen, regardless of text color.
* TUI: Fixed footer button shortcut keys for trusting the server certificate and showing Identities sidebar.
* TUI: Fixed dimensions of the New Identity dialog.
* TUI: Fixed first-run bookmarks getting re-added on every launch.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.18.1
* macOS: Fixed opening Misfin URIs externally via system handlers.
* Windows: Register Lagrange as a "misfin://" URL handler.
* TUI: Fixed potentially garbled output.
* TUI: Only link Curses statically when using CMake option `ENABLE_STATIC`.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.18

New features:
* Support for sending Misfin messages. "misfin://" links are opened in the upload dialog. You must import a Misfin identity before you can send a message.
* Misfin: Identity sidebar indicates which identities are for Misfin.
* Support for the Guppy protocol. Contributed by Dima Krasner.
* Titan: Support for the "edit" parameter in opened Titan links. The target's contents are downloaded and displayed in the upload dialog's text editor. After editing the contents are uploaded back to the server.
* Option to disable all TLS security warnings.
* Opus audio playback using libopusfile (optional dependency). Contributed by Martin Chang.

Changes and enhancements:
* The Curses-based `clagrange` can be built in addition to the GUI, not only separately. Removed the TUI build script.
* Improved UI focus navigation: arrow keys move focus to an adjacent widget.
* Context menus are keyboard-navigable with arrow keys, and the first letter of labels acts as a shortcut key to move focus on the item.
* Bookmarked URLs are automatically updated after permanent redirection. (The original URL is still saved in bookmarks.ini.)
* Line width expands dynamically (up to window size) to account for wide content like preformatted blocks and plain text lines.
* The file path can be entered manually in the upload dialog. Previously only drag-and-drop was supported.
* Right-clicking on the site banner shows a link context menu. (Linking to the capsule's root URL.)
* Show a confirmation popup when saving something to the downloads folder.
* Menubar: When opened via keyboard, reopen the most recently opened menu instead of "File".
* The Return key is now a (hardcoded) keyboard shortcut for focusing the navbar URL field.
* Page Information: Clarified meaning of "fingerprint". The type of hash (SHA-256) and what it was calculated from are specified (full certificate or just the public key).
* Updated UI symbols for "Go to Root", remote bookmarks, and the navbar bookmark indicator/button.
* Gopher: Proper parsing of Telnet line types `8` and `T`.
* Noto Emoji font updated to support Unicode 15.1.
* TUI: Often needed keyboard shortcuts are shown in place of menubar when the menubar is inactive, to make the UI more approachable.
* TUI: Improved UI layout, targeting a minimum resolution of 80x25.
* TUI: Improved text-mode rendering of various widgets.

Fixes:
* Titan URLs were incorrectly opening the upload dialog when navigating through history.
* Titan request in an open tab was resubmitted with empty content when launching the app.
* Default Titan upload identity was sometimes chosen incorrectly; should match the active Gemini identity.
* Upload dialog was missing a couple of UI strings for drag-and-drop errors.
* Gopher: Gemtext formatting (headings, quotes, etc.) found on Gopher menu pages is now escaped so it doesn't unintentionally affect the visual presentation.
* Gopher: Allow port number to be blank on `i` lines.
* Query shortcuts (bang snippets) that already contain a `?` character were prefixed by a redundant `?`.
* Link ordinals/letters (when navigating with Alt/Option or home row keys) now start at the actual top of the view.
* Incorrect event handling order with multiple windows when there is a focused widget.
* macOS: Navigating with trackpad on a non-focused window would cause the navigation to occur in another window, if the other window had focus.
* Missing focus indication in empty lists and the Snippets list.
* Holding down Alt/Option (link number modifier key) while opening a query link would prevent the prompt dialog from having input focus.
* Incorrect glyph spacing in a mixed-font preformatted block (fallback glyphs from different fonts).
* Lede paragraph highlighting was misbehaving with monospace body font; now gets disabled.
* Glyphs were sometimes partially cut off due to excessive background clearing on adjacent lines.
* TUI: Color escapes were not applied when rendering.
* TUI: Submenu chevron symbols were missing.
* TUI: Potential hang when wrapping text.

## 1.17.6
* Fixed memory leak: fetched pages were not always released from memory (reference miscount).
* Fixed minor memory leak in list widgets.
* Gopher: Autodetect Gemtext files based on file extension.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.17.5
* Fixed a few small memory leaks.
* Fixed unnecessary copying of data while waiting for an audio buffer to become playable.
* Gopher: Detect audio media type from file extension with the `s` item type (it's not always WAV).
* Content that uses `charset=utf-8` is checked for validity. If the encoding is invalid, the content is instead decoded as CP437 (if it has ANSI escapes; possibly it's ASCII art) or just Latin-1.
* Remove ANSI escapes from window titles.
* Modified rule for when 'text/plain' is assumed to actually be 'text/gemini' based on the file extension.

## 1.17.4
* Removed automatic horizontal scrolling of wide preformatted blocks. Instead, hold down the Shift key to scroll horizontally with the mouse wheel.
* Fixed an event processing issue where some events were not handled as expected, for instance when opening a link into split view the opened link was not highlighted.
* Fixed links not reacting to mouse hover after jumping to a heading from the Outline.
* Fixed input prompt behaving strangely after changing font size. (Lines are now forced to rewrap after changing the font.)
* Fixed mouse cursor not changing its shape in all open windows.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.17.3
* Fixed activating a pinned identity when opening a bookmark via the Bookmarks menu.
* Fixed initial scope of a created identity when using the default selection.
* Fixed issues with dropdown menus when the menu appears as a popup window.
* Fixed clearing the pinned identity of a bookmark.

## 1.17.2
* Tabs opened in background are immediately added to the URL history.
* Mouse wheel direction switches back to vertical when a wide block has been scrolled all the way.
* Fixed current text selection extending during scrolling even after mouse button has been released.
* Fixed drag-to-select with the mouse being too sensitive to mouse movement.
* Fixed the numbered links key (default: Alt/Option) while navigating to new pages. It is no longer necessary to release and press the key again on the new page.
* Fixed long bookmark titles making the Bookmarks menu too wide.
* ANSI Cursor Forward control sequence ("CSI n C") is converted to a series of spaces, but only in preformatted text.
* Fixed parsing of ANSI SGR sequences with many attributes concatenated (e.g., 0;1;40;30).
* Fixed inline image loading indicator overdrawing itself, becoming unreadable.
* Windows: Installer restarts the app after updating, and there is a checkbox for launching the app if it wasn't running. The uninstaller is now signed, too.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.17.1
* Added "Vibrant Light" color theme.
* Improved readability of "Colorful Light" headings.
* Tuned autoscrolling when selecting text to avoid accidental scrolling.
* Preformatted blocks no longer switch to a smaller font to fit to the page.
* Mouse wheel scrolls a wide preformatted block when hovering over the block, instead of scrolling vertically. You can hold the Shift key to swap the scroll direction.
* Fixed horizontal scrolling issues with preformatted blocks: only scroll if needed, allow scrolling anywhere on the block and not just on non-empty text lines, and when scrolling disallow swipe navigation over the area.
* Fixed visual artifacts around and next to preformatted blocks (e.g., streaking).
* Fixed potential crash after (un)folding a preformatted block.
* Fixed links being non-clickable after searching text on a page has scrolled the view.
* Fixed scroll position being reset when reloading the page.
* Fixed initial size of the upload dialog when font size has been changed.
* Fixed "View as Plain Text" context menu item after reloading a page.
* Strip any null characters from the page source during whitespace normalization.

## 1.17
⚠️ Caps Lock is no longer treated as a modifier key in keybindings. Use `--capslock` to enable it.

New features:
* The Bookmarks menu lists all of your bookmarks and folders.
* Snippets: A collection of short text segments that can be pasted into any input field via the context menu. For example, useful for your gemlog header/footer and other often-repeated parts.
* Snippets can be managed in Preferences > Snippets and created by right-clicking on links or selected text on a page.
* Custom search queries: Snippets whose name starts with a bang (e.g., "!w") can be invoked in the URL field to make customized queries. The snippet content should be a Gemini search URL, for example: "gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/search".
* Quick lookup shows matching snippets as a new type of search result.
* Keyboard shortcut Shift+1/⇧1 for conveniently making a snippet query.
* Input prompts, upload dialogs, and bookmark editors can be resized by dragging the left or right edge.
* Text zooming in the upload text editor.
* Gemtext syntax highlighting in the upload dialog.
* Recently submitted input prompt contents are saved persistently and can be restored via the Ellipsis utility menu in the prompt dialog.
* You can force the input prompt to appear before a certain URL is requested so you can enter a query string. This is useful for avoiding an extra request when it is known that a URL will require input (e.g., search engine, game input).
* When importing links as bookmarks, you can optionally create subfolders from headings. You can also choose a destination folder for the imported bookmarks.
* Quickly add/move a bookmark into a folder with the navbar bookmark button context menu (right-click on 🏷️).
* User-selectable feed refresh interval. Previously the interval been hardcoded to four hours. (Based on a patch by Michael Nordmeyer.)
* Setting to never/always collapse preformatted blocks, disabling the ability to toggle the folding.
* "Fold All" and "Unfold All" in Bookmarks sidebar context menu.
* "Search" context menu item on selected text to make a search query with it.
* "Use as Search URL" in link context menu.
* "Mark All Links as Visited" in the Tools submenu.
* Option `--capslock`: enable Caps Lock as a modifier in keybindings.
* Option `--theme` (`-t`): change UI color theme of open Lagrange windows. Can be used in scripts to switch the theme automatically (for example, see the `darkman` utility; thanks to Jason McBrayer for suggesting this).
* Support for the Nex protocol (nex://nightfall.city/nex/info/specification.txt).
* Keyboard shortcut for deleting bookmarks (Backspace). Useful when the Bookmarks list has input focus.
* macOS: System UI accent color can be chosen as the accent color.

Changes and enhancements:
* Menus can have submenus. Several of the old menus were reorganized accordingly. For example, the page context menu has a Tools submenu for translation, Titan uploads, etc.
* Show unsupported media types as plain text if the content is valid UTF-8 encoded text.
* The page scrolls while selecting text near top/bottom.
* Display a logo graphic in empty windows/tabs as a placeholder.
* Visualize input focus in lists by drawing a focus rectangle around the current item.
* Menu separators are taller and more distinct for a clearer item separation.
* Adjusted colors of the Import Identity dialog.
* Auto-hide sidebars when resizing a window/split if the document area would become narrower than the sidebar.
* Tuned theme color palette and improved background colors of "Colorful Light".
* Newly created client certificates have a default expiration date in the year 9999, which means they won't expire. One can still also set a specific date as before.
* Periodically save UI state (including each tab's navigation history) to prevent data loss in case the app crashes. These runtime saves do not include any cached page content. The full cache is still saved as before when quitting the app.

Fixes:
* Potential crash at shutdown when a feed update is ongoing.
* Problems with window refresh when multiple windows are open. For example, the cursor not blinking in input fields.
* Incorrect name displayed in page banner when URL query string contains a tilde name.
* Fixed navbar spinner animation going too fast when both sides of a split view are being loaded.
* Glitches during swipe navigation (touch screens, macOS trackpad). Behavior is more robust at ends of history and when content is not immediately available in cache.
* Fixed opening of context menus via keyboard (incorrect click position).
* Fixed a text rendering issue where glyphs were incorrect when preceded by a Narrow No-Break Space.

## 1.16.7
* Workaround for window refresh potentially getting stuck while receiving a streaming response. (Limit update frequency.)
* Don't navigate back when stopping a streaming request.

## 1.16.6
* Fixed crash on gemini://sdf.org/ where the contents of a link line would fail to be recognized as valid characters.
* Fixed splitting a long wrapped line in input fields where part of the text would remain on the preceding line. (Mixup between byte and character index.)

## 1.16.5
* "New Tab" (Ctrl+T/⌘T) and the tab bar [+] button append the tab to the right edge. Previously it was inserted next to the active tab.
* Flatpak: Fixed crash when opening Preferences.

## 1.16.4
* Context/button menus use a popup window if they would otherwise have to scroll (e.g., "Dark theme:" in Preferences and "Folder:" in the bookmark editor).
* Improved tab closing order: close all sibling tabs opened from an origin tab before switching back to the origin tab.
* Center a short title under the icon in the page margin.
* Fixed navbar URL text selection when opening new tabs (keep all selected).
* Fixed too much empty space in the input prompt layout.
* Fixed input field not being updated after cutting text.
* Fixed stuck mouse button when opening a context menu while performing a drag.
* Fixed incorrect mouse button state and other potential incorrect behavior after resizing the window.
* macOS: Fixed drag operation getting stuck if a context menu is opened during the drag.
* macOS: Fixed a few cases of potential window freezing during swipe navigation.
* Windows: Updated SDL to 2.26.5.
* Linux: The x86_64 AppImage now uses SDL 2.26.5 built from source, fixing issues with window and popup behavior.
* TUI: Fixed build error.

## 1.16.3
* Remove whitespace from ends of a URL pasted into an input field.
* Fixed links whose label is a single Emoji sometimes not appearing.
* Fixed zooming not affecting unfocused windows right away.
* Fixed current zoom level not being applied to newly created windows.
* Fixed updating of selected text range in navbar URL when changing tabs.
* Fixed mouse wheel scrolling not working in unfocused windows.
* macOS: Fixed an issue where the input focus is given to the wrong window when the application comes to the foreground.

## 1.16.2
* Set input focus to navbar URL field when opening an empty window.
* The navbar URL field only omits the "gemini:" scheme when the text actually doesn't fit horizontally, and only when the field is inactive.
* Fixed problems with handling URLs in input fields. For example, copying the URL to the clipboard sometimes had unexpected or incorrect results.
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.16.1
* Fixed handling of the AltGr key during text input (again).
* Updated UI translations.

## 1.16
New features:
* Input prompt font size can be changed with the Zoom In/Out/Reset keys.
* Preferences: Option for silently following scheme-changing redirects (Network tab; default: no).

Changes and enhancements:
* Tab creation and closing follows common browser conventions: new tabs are opened next to the most recently opened tab, so they retain the correct left-to-right order.
* Preferences: Moved cache/memory size settings to Content tab.
* Page title in margin omits prefix Emoji if it matches the bookmark icon.
* Adjusted word-wrapping to break at a period inside a word (e.g., domain names).
* If the page is missing a level 1 heading, use the first content line as the title.

Fixes:
* Fixed tab order getting reversed when restoring tabs at launch.
* Fixed order of opened tabs when using "Open in New Tabs" on a bookmark folder.
* Fixed input focus going to the wrong split when pressing Ctrl+L/⌘L with an Upload dialog open.
* Fixed text fields becoming nonresponsive when multiple fields are active.
* Fixed input query dialogs not being hidden when the tab changes.
* Fixed incorrect parsing of "hostname:port" in URL field (without `//` or `gemini://`).
* Fixed potential crash when switching between cached pages while navigating in history.
* Fixed potential crash when closing split view during a scrolling animation.

=> about:version-1.15  Older versions
